---
title: "Linked Data In(ter)action"
draft: true
---

During the recent months, the Semantic Web community is accelerating its progress around web-enhanced information and knowledge management. Specifications such as RDF and SPARQL are increasingly applied by developers and organizations, RDF software is maturing. Even the initial chicken and egg problem around data and applications has now  been solved by the Linking Open Data (LOD) project, which is bringing dataset after dataset online, each following recommended practices for simplified information access and repurposing. The time has finally come to move on and create the distributed data applications we have been dreaming of for so long.

Just like the Web's true innovation was not hypertext as such, but freeing it from isolated CD ROMs, the Semantic Web's value proposition is not information integration per se, but doing it on a global scale. Network effects will play an important role and have to be considered by application developers. Mashups on a semantic web are not one-off combinations of existing sources and APIs. They will feed their added value back into a self-enforcing Linked Data Ecosystem, thus enabling chains of applications, with each reaping the benefits of  the previous one. RDF developers these days often use terms like "Meshup" or "Hyperdata" to describe the direction they are headed.

Linked Data is all about portability and off-site use: The more a respective application attracts users, the more will it let them take their data with them and also integrate external sources. With a bit of luck, we will see not one, but a wealth of killer applications, where the "unique selling proposition" is personal and defined by each user individually.

Despite the ongoing advances, some pieces to the puzzle are still missing. This becomes clearer when we correlate the current state of the Linked Data market to a typical information life cycle classification. While we can name solutions for each value-increasing process (Creation, Organization, Utilization, Distribution, Discovery), the Utilization and Application stage represents a bottleneck. Products start to benefit from Linked Data, but few are also re-distributing their internally enriched information. Additionally, the Creation phase today is mostly driven by dedicated efforts such as the LOD project, although data manipulation and enhancing should also be possible right while people are interacting with semantic web content.
